# From Me

What is stochastics?

When the number of elements grows sufficiently large, it is no longer
productive to describe them individually.

Granularity.

Stochatic music generalize music and audio theory. 

indiscriminately compose with space and sound.

When we write



# From Tod

## - Why stochastics?

Why is this technique particularly well suited for the kinds of
processes you developed.

## 2 - What is particularly interesting about using one technique...

(stochastics)  ...for such diverse musical procedures, from space/sound to
tempo/rhythm to sound design/performance?

## 3 - What is new about your use of stochastics...

...or about anything specific in your thesis. Differentiating your
work from others’ (being truthful, not boastful, of course) is one of
the tasks of a Masters thesis, and also one of the reason to be
thoughtful in the selection of precedents…..showing that you know what
others have done, appreciate their accomplishments, understand their
shortcomings (including Xenakis, where necessary), and have carefully
chosen - and now identified - your own contribution.

# Important Exceprts

The computer’s inability to understand feeling has led to new genres
of music like EDM2, Black MIDI3, and Demoscene4, but these styles of
music feature (rather than fix) the inhuman nature of computers. If we
want to integrate a computer into the performance or production of
truly expressive music, we must capture perceived feelings
formulaically and program the computer to reproduce them. This thesis
describes three different, but related projects that confront this
challenge from contrasting perspectives: Reflection Visualizer,

As the ideas that inspired Xenakis and other progressive 20th century
composers were taking root in contemporary music, the culture of
artistic form and composition was already beginning the transition
into the digital domain. There is no reason why digital tools cannot
favor stochastic processes to linearity; there is no reason why
digital tools cannot treat music and architecture as equals. However,
even today, software for composing music still favors static pitches
to glissandi; software for architectural design still favors corners
to curves. Most importantly, the software skills that we use to design
and manipulate space, and the skills that we use to compose music,
mutually exclude each other.

This is where the projects described here make a contribution.  By
drawing from music, mathematics, computer science, acoustics, audio
engineering and mixing, sound reinforcement, multimedia production,
and live performance, we can create tools that allow us to
indiscriminately compose with space and sound.

# Performance

New chapter -(update link in introduction)

Lots of Spatial Sound stuff in Hyper compression section. Use material
from thesis proposal

# ok

Add Chandelier Stuff to Intro. 
 
Check subtitle from website - I can still change th title - Add new
sub title. 

#Conclusion

Story about the phillips pavilion virtual reality revival
project.

They built a custom sequencer that was capable of controlling the 180
channels of lighting and visual effects. 

Go on to say that we need interdisciplineary

Find the balance - let the computers do the formulaic things. Let the
people do the feeling things.

The easy work has been done. People are familiar with echo, phasing,
distortion, the basic effects that we can buy in prepackaged
collections or multieffects boxes don't help us 

# Fit this in somewhere

Some composers reacted to the serialism by Xenakis had the opposite reaction. Xenakis saw how we
could mathematically paramaterize chance, and create sonorities that
arise from statistical means without depending on pure chance. 

# If there's time:
THe Architecture and Music in Space and Time section is too long. put
it somewhere else?

# Also in Ref Mod 
We know that Xenakis turned to curved surfaces because he wanted to
avoid x

He probably actually wanted difuse reflections,

But if his use of reflections had been intentional, how would he have
used them? 

Ref Mod-  Email from Ben: Did you see this?  acoustic mirrors in
England
