\chapter*{Acknowledgements}
\label{ch:acknowledgements}

\begin{fullwidth}
Thanks to Tod Machover, for your continuous support and encouragement,
for sharing your process, and for help and support integrating \thesis
into \textit{Of Experience}.

Thanks to James Andy Moorer and Joe Paradiso for support, guidance and
mentorship.\TODO{verify spelling}

Thanks to professor Alex Case for the most inspiring my love for
music, audio engineering, and illuminating the magical subtleties of
dynamic range compression.

Thanks to Wonshik Choi and Niyom Lue for your infinite patience,
guidance, and for welcoming me to MIT in 2008. Only you could have
taught a music major to enjoy linux, DSP, and spectroscopy.

Thanks to Shawn Drost for directly and indirectly giving me confidence
as a software developer.

Thanks to my UMass Lowell Piano teachers for taking chance with me,
and putting up with me for four years. Anthony Mele, Elizabeth
Skavish, Bonnie Anderson, and Thomas Stumpf - You believed in me
before I did. I'm probably the only student ever who was lucky enough
to study with all four of you. :P

Thanks to Gene Atwood for being considerate of everyone, and showing
me how important that is -- And for screaming in to a microphone when
I needed some screams.

Thanks to Ben Bloomberg for being my peer and my mentor at the same
time. Thanks for bringing me into the Opera group in 2008 and bringing
me back in 2014. Thanks to Bryn Bliska, for proposing polytempic
modulation, and sharing letting me work out the maths. Thanks to
Rebecca Kleinberger and Akito Van Troyer for your unending support and
encouragement. 

Thanks to Helen Corless for being amazing supportive even when I am in
the absolute pits of grad student existence. Thank you for always
reminding me what music is really about, and for challenging me like
no one else can.

Thanks to my grandparents for leading by example, and teaching
kindness and dedication, and for endless support in education.

Thanks to Hilary, Giles, and Felicity for always inspiring me with
kindness, honesty, and wisdom. 

And thanks to my parents, Gwen and Mark for forcing me to get an
education before I was wise enough to know I wanted one. Thank you for
all your love and support in everything ever I have ever done.
\end{fullwidth}
%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: t
%%% End:
